#Hidden_Markov_Model

Overview In this assignment you will write a Hidden Markov Model part-of-speech tagger for Catalan. The training data is provided tokenized and tagged; the test data will be provided tokenized, and your tagger will add the tags. The assignment will be graded based on the performance of your tagger, that is how well it performs on unseen test data compared to the performance of a reference tagger.

Data:
A set of training and development data will be made available as a compressed ZIP archive on Blackboard. The uncompressed archive will have the following format: A ﬁle with tagged training data in the word/TAG format, with words separated by spaces and each sentence on a new line. A ﬁle with untagged development data, with words separated by spaces and each sentence on a new line. A ﬁle with tagged development data in the word/TAG format, with words separated by spaces and each sentence on a new line, to serve as an answer key. A readme/license ﬁle (which you won’t need for the exercise). The grading script will train your model on all of the tagged training and development data, and test the model on unseen data in a similar format. 

Programs:
You will write two programs: hmmlearn.py will learn a hidden Markov model from the training data, and hmmdecode.py will use the model to tag new data. If using Python 3, you will name your programs hmmlearn3.py and hmmdecode3.py. The learning program will be invoked in the following way: > python hmmlearn.py /path/to/input The argument is a single ﬁle containing the training data; the program will learn a hidden Markov model, and write the model parameters to a ﬁle called hmmmodel.txt. The format of the model is up to you, but it should contain sufﬁcient information for hmmdecode.py to successfully tag new data. The tagging program will be invoked in the following way: > python hmmdecode.py /path/to/input The argument is a single ﬁle containing the test data; the program will read the parameters of a hidden Markov model from the ﬁle hmmmodel.txt, tag each word in the test data, and write the results to a text ﬁle called hmmoutput.txt in the same format as the training data. 

Grading:
We will train your model, run your tagger on new test data, and compute the accuracy of your output compared to a reference annotation. Your grade will be the accuracy of your tagger, scaled to the performance of a reference HMM tagger developed by us. Since part-of-speech tagging can achieve high accuracy by using a baseline tagger that just gives the most common tag for each word, only the performance above the baseline will be scaled: If your accuracy <= baseline accuracy, your grade is your accuracy. If baseline accuracy < your accuracy < reference accuracy, your grade is baseline + (1 – baseline) × (yours – baseline) / (reference – baseline). If reference accuracy <= your accuracy, your grade is 100. For example, if the baseline is 90%, the reference in 95%, and your accuracy is 93%, then your grade will be 0.9 + 0.1 × 0.03 / 0.05 = 96%.

Notes:
Slash character. The slash character ‘/’ is the separator between words and tags, but it also appears within words in the text, so be very careful when separating words from tags. To make life easy, all tags in the data are exactly two characters long. Smoothing and unseen words and transitions. You should implement some method to handle unknown vocabulary and unseen transitions in the test data, otherwise your programs won’t work. The unknown vocabulary problem is familiar from your naive Bayes classiﬁer. The unseen transition problem is more subtle: you may ﬁnd that the test data contains two adjacent unambiguous words (that is, words that can only have one part-of-speech tag), but the transition between these tags was never seen in the training data, so it has a probability of zero; in this case the Viterbi algorithm will have no way to proceed. The reference solution will use add-one smoothing on the transition probabilities and no smoothing on the emission probabilities; for unknown tokens in the test data it will ignore the emission probabilities and use the transition probabilities alone. You may use more sophisticated methods which you implement yourselves.

Runtime efﬁciency. Vocareum imposes a limit on running times, and if a program takes too long, Vocareum will kill the process. Your program therefore needs to run efﬁciently. Run times for the reference solution are approximately 2 seconds for running hmmlearn.py on the training data and 5 seconds for running hmmdecode.py on the development data, running on a MacBook Pro from 2012.
